The abstract: Breast Cancer is the common cancer among women and one of the deadliest. If not diagnosed early and correctly, the chances of survival decline. With the emergence of Artificial Intelligence AI, time consuming and complicate tasks become easier. Done using AI algorithms, it can be more efficient than the traditional way of doing things. In healthcare the introduction of AI is transformative, not only does it simplify processes but it can also save lives. Early diagnosis is the key to “beating” a malignant tumor, and this is where AI, specifically Deep Learning comes into play. Based on Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), Deep Learning can assist practitioners with its high computational speed, forming fast and accurate diagnosis.  ANNs learn from past experiences and excel at image recognition, making them useful to analyze medical images like mammograms. They generalize to perform well on unseen data and offer better accuracy than conventional statistical techniques. In this paper we explore DL techniques used for breast cancer detection. 

The introduction:  Breast Cancer is a general term that refers to cells that grow larger than 1.5 mm in every 3 months and multiply out of control and spreads to other parts of the body. Cells become cancerous when they lose their ability to stop dividing, to stay where they belong, and to die at the proper time). According to the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), in 2022, female breast cancer was the second most commonly diagnosed cancer worldwide with 2.3 million cases (11.6% of the total new cases). In 2015; 570,000 women died due to breast cancer which is approximately 15% of all death among women from cancer. As a woman gets older, her likelihood of developing breast cancer increases significantly, regardless of her family history. As known, prevention is better than cure. An early diagnosis can save lives if made accurately and at the early stages. The survival rate for breast cancer in many countries is often reported to be upwards of 40%. [cancer_rates]. Fortunately, if it is accurately detected in early stages, it can be successfully treated before it gets a chance to spread to the other parts of the body. It is strongly recommended to detect and manage it before it progresses to advanced stages. This is why; breast cancer screening methods and tools are considered the standard procedure for early detection. Therefore, accurate diagnosis is a critical and pressing challenge in the medical science community. Mammography is a valuable tool for identifying breast cancer in the early phase before physical symptoms develop [10.1007@s11042-019-7479-6]. A key challenge in achieving accurate diagnosis is extracting valuable insights from historical diagnostic data. And this is how Machine Learning Algorithms work, they learn from past data. Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), particularly deep learning models which is a subfield of Machine Learning, excel in pattern recognition, making them highly effective for cancer detection. The remarkable progress in deep learning over the past years can be attributed to significant improvements in hardware capabilities and the growing availability of massive labeled datasets. These factors enable neural networks to achieve higher precision in medical diagnosis, not to forget their high computational speed, which saves time. 




